# Creating a blog in Node.js using Git to store our blog posts

[See the full code](https://github.com/siriusastrebe/gitblogger/blob/master/mvp.js) - Programmer skill required: Basic git knowledge

Welcome to my very first blog post! Today I'd like to share step by step how I created this very blog from scratch, and how you can too using Node.js and Git!

## Requirements

I've wanted a blog for a while, and I had basic considerations for this blogging software:

1. It could take either Markdown or HTML

2. I can create/edit blogs on any machine (that I trust) without SSH

3. Publishing posts is a 1 step action with no server downtime (basic Continuous Deployment)

4. It can be customizable (I'm a programmer!)

I thought, why not just store my blog posts in a public git repo?

I would still need a server to pull my latest blog posts from this git server.

Great! Lets get to it.

# Node.js

I like starting a web service as basic as possible. 

First, lets start with a node server that can respond to requests and turn markdown into HTML. Name this file `app.js`

```javascript
const markdown = require('markdown-it');
const express = require('express');
const app = express();
const port = 3000;

app.get('/', (req, res) => {
  const html = markdown.render(contents);
  res.send("<html><body>" + html + "</body></html>");
});

app.listen(port, () => console.log(`blog running on http://localhost:${port}`))
```

The first two lines tell us we're using a library called Markdown and Express, so don't forget to run these commands in your terminal to install these libraries and have them saved to our package.json file:

```bash
npm install --save markdown-it
npm install --save express
```

If you don't yet have Node.js and npm installed, the above commands will fail. You can [download Node and NPM here at the official www.nodejs.org website](https://nodejs.org/en/download/).

We could have easily used more modern Node backend frameworks like [koa](https://koajs.com/) or [sails](https://sailsjs.com/), but for this example we'll stick to the battle-tested [express](https://expressjs.com/) framework.

Now, lets run our server. In the terminal, type: 

```bash
node app.js
```

Navigating to localhost:3000 in the browser should reveal our marked-down hello world page. 

Awesome! If we were content with simplicity we could maintain our blog by expanding this line: `const html = markdown.render(contents);`

It would work okay but we're missing basic things like styling, our code woudln't be modular, and publishing new blog posts will require a full server restart to take effect. If we deploy our server on a cloud computing service, it would take quite a bit of effort to change the file on our server and restart the server manually.

If we instead store our blog posts in a git repository, we can easily commit and push new blog posts from anywhere. Let's expand on our server to support reading from a remote git repository.

[Isomorphic-git](https://github.com/isomorphic-git/isomorphic-git) is a powerful git library in Node.js which supports async/await functions, which we'll explore shortly. Lets go ahead and install this into our project.

```bash
npm install --save isomorphic-git
```

And in our app.js file, add this starting on line 5 next to our other dependencies:

```javascript
const git      = require('isomorphic-git');
const http     = require('isomorphic-git/http/node');
const fs       = require('fs');

, these helper functions can be also added to our app.js:

async function clone() {
  const remote = 'https://github.com/siriusastrebe/blog.git';
  const dir = './blog';
  console.log(`Git - Clone ${remote} to ${dir}`);

  await git.clone({
    fs,
    http,
    dir: dir,
    url: remote
  });
}

async function pull() {
  const dir = './blog';
  console.log(`Git - Pull ${dir}`);

  await git.pull({
    fs,
    http,
    dir: dir,
    ref: 'master',
    author: {name: 'siriusastrebe', email: ''},
  });
}
```

These two functions will clone and pull our remote repository. You can customize the remote repository `const remote = 'https://github.com/siriusastrebe/blog.git';` to your own repo. But for now we can keep it as a pre-populated blog repo.

Note that the function calls say `async function`. This tells the Node.js compiler that these functions will be waiting on long tasks, like network requests. You can see what lines specifically it will be waiting on, they're marked with an `await`. Node.js will let other pending code execute while it waits on these long tasks. It also means that the function returns as a Promise. If that sounds confusing, don't worry, they're easy to work with as async functions.

So far these functions are never called. When our server starts, we want to make sure our blog git repository is cloned into our directory. We then also want to make sure that on each request, we pull the latest contents of our git repository.

Remove these lines from our app.js:

```javascript
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
  const html = markdown.render(contents);
  res.send("<html><body>" + html + "</body></html>");
});
```

Replace it with these lines:

```javascript
clone().then(pull).then(runServer);

function runServer() {
  app.get('/', async (req, res) => {
    await poll()

    const dir = await fs.promises.readdir('./blog/blogs/');

    const promises = dir.map(async (d) => {
      return fs.promises.readFile('./blog/blogs/' + d, 'utf8');
    });

    const contents = await Promise.all(promises);

    res.send(contents.join('\n\n'));
  });

  app.listen(port, () => console.log(`blog running on http://localhost:${port}`));
}
```

Whats going on here? Our app.get() and app.listen() code is now wrapped inside of a function called runServer. Only after we clone then pull our git repo, does our server start running.

Inside of our app.get() function, the line `await poll()` means our git repository will be up to date with the lastest master branch. The repository will be cloned onto our filesystem in the directory specified by our clone() function, `./blog`.

The line `const dir = await fs.promises.readdir('./blog/blogs/');` will give us an array of filenames contained in our blog directory. The fs library originally did not support Promises or async/await, so we need to use the fs.promises which provides support for these.

The contents of our files need to be read before we can display their contents to the browser. The following lines accomplish this.

```javascript
const promises = dir.map(async (d) => {
  return fs.promises.readFile('./blog/blogs/' + d, 'utf8');
});

const contents = await Promise.all(promises);
```

`.map()` takes an array and runs the same code on each item in our array, and will give us back an array of the same size containing the returned values. In this case, our code `return fs.promises.readFile('./blog/blogs/' + d, 'utf8');` actually returns a Promise. 

What does that mean? Promises will delay their execution until they are triggered by an `await` or a `.then()`, or in our case a `Promise.all()`. Promise.all() will trigger each promise and wait for them to return with the contents of our files. Pretty nifty!

Alright lets test it out. Restart our server again using the command:

```bash
node app.js
```

What do we see? This post! We're making great progress but we're not quite there yet. Scrolling down reveals more posts, but they're sorted from oldest first to newest. We want it the other way around. We could also use some styling. Lets give it some by adding an HTMLFormat() function with this CSS, inspired by [better...website.com](http://bettermotherfuckingwebsite.com/).

Here's the full code in all its glory:

```javascript
const markdown = require('markdown-it');
const express  = require('express');
const app      = express();
const port     = 3000;
const git      = require('isomorphic-git');
const http     = require('isomorphic-git/http/node');
const fs       = require('fs');

let lastPull;

// Fresh repository pull
clone().then(pull).then(runServer);

function runServer() {
  app.get('/', async (req, res) => {
    const page = Number(req.params.page) || 0;

    await poll()
    const dir = await fs.promises.readdir('./blog/blogs/');

    const sorted = dir.sort((a, b) => a < b ? 1 : -1);

    const promises = sorted.map(async (d) => {
      return fs.promises.readFile('./blog/blogs/' + d, 'utf8');
    });

    const contents = await Promise.all(promises);

    res.send(HTMLFormat(contents, dir));
  });

  app.listen(port, () => console.log(`blog running on http://localhost:${port}`));
}

// ----------------------------------------------------------------
// Helper functions
// ----------------------------------------------------------------
async function clone() {
  const remote = 'https://github.com/siriusastrebe/blog.git';
  const dir = './blog';
  console.log(`Git - Clone ${remote} to ${dir}`);

  await git.clone({
    fs,
    http,
    dir: dir,
    url: remote,
    singleBranch: true
  });
}

async function pull() {
  const dir = './blog';
  lastPull = new Date();
  console.log(`Git - Pull ${dir}`);

  await git.pull({
    fs,
    http,
    dir: dir,
    ref: 'master',
    author: {name: 'siriusastrebe', email: ''},
    singleBranch: true
  });
}

async function poll() {
  if (new Date() - lastPull > 60000) {
    return await pull();
  }
}

function HTMLFormat(posts, filenames) {
  let html = "<!DOCTYPE html><html><body>";

  posts.forEach((post, i) => {
    html += formatFile(post, filenames[i]);
  });

  html += "</body>";
  html += "<style type=\"text/css\">body{margin:40px auto;max-width:800px;font-size:18px;color:#333;padding:0 10px;background:#FAFBFC}h1,h2,h3{line-height:1.2}pre{background:lightyellow;overflow:scroll;padding:0 20px}</style>";
  html += "</html>";
  return html;
}

function formatFile(contents, filename) {
  if (filename.substring(filename.length - 3) === '.md') {
    return markdown.render(contents);
  } else if (filename.substring(filename.length - 5) === '.html') {
    return contents;
  }
}
```

I've also added in a poll() function, which limits the number of pull requests to the remote git server to once every minute. This is crucial in the event of a Denial of Service attack, otherwise every request to our webserver would result in a request to github. The DoS'ed would become the DoS'er.

Incredible! We have a fully working blog just like that. We could still use things like page headers, search, pagination, and code cleanliness considerations like moving our CSS and HTML templating to separate files. I'll be exploring those topics in upcoming posts.

With less than 100 lines, we've created ourselves a beautiful, (very minimalist) blog, ready for production.

## Other considerations

* Markdown and HTML are supported, but what about other formats? LateX is a great format that we could utilize. What about PDFs?

* One option I considered was using [github pages](https://pages.github.com/) for a blog. This blog would be limited to static pages. [One person built theirs](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2014/08/build-blog-jekyll-github-pages/) using github pages and [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/). Jekyll adds another step that needs to be automated for Continuous Deployment. What if instead you skip the jekyll step and use client-side javascript on a github pages to make AJAX/fetch queries to your own github pages? You could maintain directory listings, implement previous/next buttons. There's a lot of great options down this rabbit hole but without a true backend server, we can't implement interactive elements like comments, voting, or comprehensive search.

* Isomorphic-git actually supports using Git on the browser! In their notes they state, 

  "Unfortunately, due to the same-origin policy by default isomorphic-git can only clone from the same origin as the webpage it is running on. This is terribly inconvenient, as it means for all practical purposes cloning and pushing repos must be done through a proxy." 

  Despite the limitation the idea of accessing the contents of a git repo directly from the browser is quite novel, and could be used as an alternative to traditional REST APIs for sharing/communicating data between server and client. Similar to [pouchDB](https://pouchdb.com/) or firebase.
